Immortality in a Nutshell: A Daily Practice for Amitāyus Extracting the Pristine Nectar Namo guru padma aparimitāyurjñānāya. For those who prefer to practice essentially, here is a daily sādhana for Amitāyus Extracting the Pristine Nectar from the terma cycle known as Bearing the Seal of Secrecy. I. Preliminaries A. Refuge and Bodhicitta Visualize the objects of refuge, take refuge in them, and generate bodhicitta in their presence. From now until enlightenment, I and all sentient beings Take refuge in the Three Roots and the deities of longevity. I generate the pure motivation of bodhicitta, wishing to accomplish the level of an immortal vidyādhara For others, so that they attain complete buddhahood. Repeat three times. B. Expelling Obstructing Forces and Establishing the Protective Tent Set the boundaries and the protective spheres. HRĪḤ I am Hayagrīva, wielding a club and a menacing mudrā. From my heart stream wrathful emanations, weapons, and masses of fire That banish negative forces, obstructions, and elemental demons which steal all life and lifeforce. Then, they transform into the protective tent. OM VAJRA KRODHA HAYAGRĪVA HULU HULU HŪṂ PHAṬ | NÖJE JUNGPO UCATTĀYA PHAṬ | OM VAJRA CAKRA JVALA RAṂ HŪṂ BHRŪM HŪṂ C. Blessing the Offerings In case you have arranged some physical offerings, say: HRĪḤ The substances to accomplish the maṇḍala of immortal vidyādharas And the outer, inner, and secret naturally present offerings Are purified of every impurity, error, confusion, and imperfection And blessed by the three wisdom syllables. Purify the offerings with: RAṂ YAṂ KHAṂ Repeat three times. So they satisfy every desire, multiply the offerings with: OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ Repeat three times. II. Main Practice A. Deity Generation OṂ SVABHĀVA ŚUDDHĀḤ SARVADHARMĀḤ SVABHĀVA ŚUDDHO 'HAṂ From the expanse of emptiness free of grasping, Padmākara appears like bubbles on the surface of water, Sitting on a lotus and moon seat In the saṃbhogakāya form of white Amitāyus, Holding a vajra and a long-life vase. The ḍākinī Mandāravā sits on his lap. She is wearing white, and she embraces him with her two arms that hold a lotus and a skull cup. Both appear in their saṃbhogakāya form, Adorned with the silk, jewel, and bone ornaments. In his body are three channels and five cakras. In the center of each cakra Are white, red, dark blue, yellow, and green Padma Tötreng Tsals in saṃbhogakāya form, Holding in their right hand a wheel, a lotus, a vajra, A jewel, and a crossed vajra, respectively; in their left hand, they hold a long-life vase. Each wears the secret garment, the monastic shawl, and the lotus hat. The five ravishing consorts-Mandāravā, Śākyadevī, Yeshe Tsogyal, Kālasiddhī, And Tashi Kyedren- Appear in the forms of Buddhalocanā, Pāṇḍaravāsinī, Māmakī, Ratnolkā, And Samayatārā. Holding their respective hand implements in their right hands And a skull cup filled with the elixir of long life in their left, The deities are naked and adorned with the bone ornaments. Their hair is loose, and they are attractive, seductive, and arousing. The deities strike the vajra and lotus postures Amidst rainbow lights. Say these words and actualize their meaning. B. Invitation, Prostration, and Offerings In brief, the next steps in the practice, such as inviting the maṇḍala of wisdom deities and so on, are: HRĪḤ From the infinite palace of utterly pure nature, Padma Tötreng Tsal, who has power over life- Please come and remain here, indivisible from our visualization. We prostrate in devotion with body, speech, and mind And present you with outer, inner, and secret offerings. Please grant the supreme and ordinary accomplishments! OṂ VAJRA GURU PADMA ĀYURJÑĀNA ARGHAṂ PĀDYAṂ PUṢPE DHŪPE ĀLOKE GANDHE NAIVIDYĀ ŚABDA PRATĪCCHA SVĀHĀ | MAHĀPAÑCA AMṚTA BALIṄTA RAKTA KHĀHI C. Praise HRĪḤ Merely thinking of you terminates that devil, the Lord of Death! To you, Padmākara Amitāyus, And to the deities of the union of E and VAṂ, We prostrate in devotion with body, speech, and mind. D. Recitation At my heart, on a moon disc, is a brilliant white syllable HRĪḤ. The mantra garland revolves around it. Light emanates from the syllables to gather The glorious quintessence of the four elements, Which restores the ruptures and decline of my la vitality and longevity. The luminosity also gathers all the life, merit, and wisdom of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa in the form of five-colored rays of light, Which enter the maṇḍala of the deities' bodies through the top of their heads And then flow out from the point of union as bodhicitta nectar That fills my three channels and five cakras. As a result, the obstacles of untimely death are pacified, Life, merit, wealth, and wisdom flourish, And I become an immortal vidyādhara. As you say this prayer, think about its meaning, and then recite the mantra: OṂ VAJRA GURU PADMA ĀYURJÑĀNA SARVA SIDDHI NṚI BHRŪM HŪṂ JAḤ | VAJRA ĀYUṢE SVĀHĀ At the end of the session, recite the vowel and consonant mantra, the mantra of dependent origination, the offering mantra, and the verse of praise. If you wish, you may also add a tseguk longevity-summoning prayer at this point. Purify mistakes and negativity with confession by reciting the hundred-syllable mantra. III. Conclusion A. Dissolution and Rearising The universe and all those dwelling in it melt into light. The light dissolves into me, And I myself dissolve into clear light, vanishing into basic space. Again, the illusory form of union Arises like a rainbow from the sky. Saying this eliminates the extremes of permanence and nihilism. B. Dedications, Aspirations, and Prayers of Auspiciousness Through the positivity and merit of this practice, May I swiftly attain the realization of the protector Amitāyus And thereby lead every single sentient being To their state of perfection. Dedicate, make aspirations, and say words of auspiciousness with these four lines and any other prayers that are appropriate. This text is a brief practice based on the main part of the pure vision root text-the part that details the visualization-with the addition of preliminary and other sections. It was arranged by Khyentse Wangpo, a mere servant who delights his master, the Lake-Born Guru. May the merit of this compilation be the cause for all beings to enjoy everything they desire and the glory of long life and wisdom. 
